---
title: "Walter White has been on Better Call Saul the whole time - and she’s breaking bad"
date: 2022-04-22T14:28:14-04:00
draft: true
---

***This post assumes the reader has an up-to-date knowledge of the events of *Better Call Saul* through the first two episodes of Season 6.***

***

Imagine reaching a point in your relationship with your partner where you feel comfortable telling them about something private you enjoy that is intensely personal, unusual, possibly dark, and likely off-putting to most people. You figure the worst thing that can happen is that they dislike it so much you both never talk about it again. Naturally, you don’t even consider the disconcerting possibility that they will enjoy it **much, much** more than you do.

That’s the situation Jimmy find himself in now in his marriage to Kim Wexler. In the opening episode of this season, Kim gives Jimmy McGill’s ill-fitting brown suit, the first he ever wore in the series, to a pro bono client. It’s Kim who can clearly envision Saul’s car and “cathedral of justice”. In an interesting reversal from the start of Season 5, Jimmy is now the one who is forced to play along, just happy making Kim happy. The unthinkable has happened; Kim may be more in love with Saul Goodman than Jimmy McGill.

There has been much clamor over the [recent reveal that both Walter White and Jesse Pinkman will appear in *Better Call Saul* Season 6](https://twitter.com/BetterCallSaul/status/1513004792049815552?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw%7Ctwcamp%5Etweetembed%7Ctwterm%5E1513004792049815552%7Ctwgr%5E%7Ctwcon%5Es1_&ref_url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.rollingstone.com%2Ftv%2Ftv-news%2Fbetter-call-saul-breaking-bad-walter-white-pinkman-1335540%2F). But after the events of the first two episodes of Season 6, it’s clear that in some ways, a latent, female version of Walter White has been on the show this entire time.

Seeing Kim’s continued transformation in the first episodes of this new season feels equal parts poetic, harrowing, and creatively insightful. Unlike Jimmy, Walt and Kim have a nature more suited to truly embrace a criminal persona like “Saul Goodman” or “Heisenberg”. They both rely on their thinking function rather than their emotions, making them exceptional at their chosen white-collar careers (chemistry aficionado and legal wizard), while also giving them the potential for a ruthless bent that is realized in varying degrees and contexts (Say my name … or just ask the Kettlemans). [Rhee Seehorn, the actress who plays Kim, has noted how “Kim feels naked when she shows emotion”](https://www.goldderby.com/article/2020/rhea-seehorn-better-call-saul-amc-video-interview/). Both Walt and Kim have deep desires and unfulfilled impulses they have buried, likely extending back many years, as well as a strong sense of pride, a (often suppressed) desire for independence, and control freak tendencies (“You don’t save me, I save me”). 

We are familiar with Walt insecurities and hunger for power. While we have yet to gain a full glimpse into Kim’s upbringing, it’s clear she shares Jimmy compassion for the downtrodden of society and may even have far more personal experience with it than he does. In a Season 5 teaser, we got a window into Kim’s turbulent childhood, from which we can infer she was raised by a single mother who was likely an addict. It’s a safe bet that before Season 6 wraps we will have seen another flashback that further illuminates Kim’s personality as a youth, and the turmoil she has internalized and compartmentalized. It will be a scene that helps to explain how nearly all of her cons and pro bono work have a vindictive bent aimed at the higher-ups of the world (in the first episode, she passionately explains to Jimmy how her client has been scapegoated by his rich “friend” with better lawyers).

The similarities extend into Kim and Walt’s respective descents into crime. To fully discuss this, we must reexamine the Jimmy-Kim relationship through this new lens. If asked to describe Jimmy and Kim’s relationship succinctly, I would say it’s a delightful remix of *Wall-E* (and Eve) and *His Girl Friday*, a classic screwball comedy about an ethically flexible newspaper editor winning back his ex-wife and partner-in-crime. *Saul* writers haven’t been shy about referencing the film (twice!). When it comes to the Kim and Jimmy’s base personalities and emotional connection, it’s Pixar. Narratively and thematically, it’s unfortunately more like *His Girl Friday*.

This connection is more than a neat qualitative parallel. It clarifies a non-traditional, often non-verbal, love story, how the Saul Goodman persona was built, where the show is headed, and the critical ways in which *Breaking Bad* and *Better Caul Saul* are different (and which is a better show… for you!). Kim’s “breaking bad”-style transformation has begun to illuminate the ways in which Jimmy is not, and never truly has been, Saul Goodman. While many aspects of the Saul persona come from the affable, expressive, and morally flexible nature of Jimmy, Saul’s callousness has always been outsourced.

For those who doubt the parallels between Wall-E and Saul, rewatch episode 6 of Season 1 (“Bingo”), particularly how Jimmy reacts to both Kim turning down his (first) offer of legal partnership and when Kim lies to him about how she got the opportunity to join Schweikart and Cokely as a partner in Season 4. Jimmy is competitive and cuts corners, but he is also emotionally loyal and somewhat clingy. More precisely, he is motivated by people and his interpersonal relationships, and always prefers group projects to solo ones. His need for approval and legitimacy rears its head both in his contentious relationship with Chuck and his professional and romantic pursuit of Kim.

Ironically (and soon to be tragically), only “Slippin” Jimmy is only able to romantically attract Kim. The vulnerable, “always down” Jimmy has Kim’s sympathies, friendship, and pity, but the “Slippin” aspect of their relationship is their aphrodisiac. In this way, Kim makes a similar mistake as Chuck with regards to truly helping repair Jimmy’s self-image. The closest and most intimate aspects of their relationship require Jimmy to continue to lean into his “Slippin”, Saul Goodman half. What keeps them together as more than friends is the conning. In Season 2, when Jimmy messes up at David & Main, it’s not some heroic and redemptive sacrifice by Jimmy that gets him back into Kim’s good graces. It’s Kim calling him about a potential scam. In Season 4, the two slowly drift apart over the course of eight months. It’s again the ambitious con involving saving Jimmy’s friend Huell from injustice that brings them back together. They get married for legal protection, and because Kim does not want to be left out of any of Jimmy’s other cons. Enter Lalo ...

A la *Wall-E*, one can take a rosy view of the Jimmy-Kim relationship as Jimmy teaching Kim to unwind and dig deeper into her feelings and the feelings of others[^1]. One memorable and strangely romantic scene involves Jimmy and Kim imitating a conversation between Kim and her boss Kevin Wachtell. But this is no simple rom-com – al a *His Girl Friday*, these lessons occur via conning and scams. Kim is learning how to apply her result-oriented and logical personality to the emotional sphere to get what she wants, whether that’s a larger Mesa Verde Bank and Trust branch, some fun at the expense of douchebags, or righteous justice.

In this world of cons, the law, and other forms of interpersonal surgery, Jimmy is a tactical genius, while Kim begins to fill the complementary niche of the cold strategist. Jimmy still deeply cares about how others see him. He often feels guilty as we see in with the Kettlemans this Season and at the end of Season 3 with Irene and her friends at Sandpiper. This prevents him from being truly ruthless and even makes him submissive in certain situations (we see Kim begin to take control and lead cons in season 4, and look where we are now). Recall the dynamics of Saul’s association with Walter White (“We’re done when we say we’re done”).

Thus, the only remaining questions for their relationship involve how Jimmy comes to fully embrace Saul, and what Kim’s role is in that process. Jimmy learned to be Saul Goodman as a defense mechanism and perhaps even as a subconscious leaning into his brother’s unwaveringly negative image of him, ossified by his guilt over Chuck’s death. He weaponizes his empathy from time to time to feel like less of a loser. Yes, Jimmy did enjoy being Saul early on in Season 5, but the fun was quickly corrupted by becoming involved with the cartel, much like a tasty ice cream cone becoming infested by fire ants. 

Look also at how Kim and Jimmy react to their brushes with the Lalo and the cartel towards the end of Season 5. Jimmy is persistently uncomfortable, tolerating the experience to make money, and is determined to keep Kim away from that world (“I see Lalo! You don’t see Lalo!). Kim is a little shaken, but goes to work the day after and sleeps just fine (granted, she has not been in a gunfight like Jimmy has - yet).

As of right now, Saul is still a persona Jimmy has to adopt professionally – observe how he struggles to put and keep on the Saul mask when meeting with the prosecutor and detective involved with Lalo’s case in the opening episode of Season 6. Kim did not understand Saul Goodman at first, but now she seems to have no such pains. In fact, she’s still hungry for more (“Here try this, it was delicious”).

Meanwhile, Kim and Walt’s respective descents into crime feel like liberations. Both of their transformations are the product of repressed internal motivations that verge towards the vindictive, brought to the surface by outside events. For Walt, it is his lung cancer diagnosis. For Kim, it’s more ambiguous. Was it simply starting a relationship with Jimmy after their first con in Season 2? Was it seeing how much creative fun Jimmy was having as Saul at the beginning of Season 5, whilst she was stuck at the beck and call of Mesa Verde? Or was it the high of pulling one over Lalo Salamanca, [Prince of the Narcos](https://www.gq.com/story/better-call-saul-tony-dalton-lalo-salamanca), combined with the money Saul Goodman can rake in to fund her pro bono work - does she see herself as the Robin Hood of American jurisprudence?

This remains to be analyzed, but it’s clear that both Walt and Kim enjoy the euphoria that accompany these awakenings. In the first episode of Season 6, an energetic Kim lively chatters away about her day at the restaurant, a notable departure from her more reticent self from previous season. It was “one of the best days of \[her\] (professional) life” she proclaims. Walt felts more “alive” than ever when building his drug empire. But we know these are fireworks, not destined to last. 

Walt and Kim also feel the need to rationalize their criminality to an extent Jimmy and Jesse never did[^2]. Walt is justified because he’s dying of lung cancer and needs to provide for his family. Kim is justified because she will only be hurting those who “deserve” it, and helping those in dire need of legal representation only the well-off can afford.

***

It hard to believe that a show that can look at the Saul Goodman character from *Breaking Bad*, (whose choice lines from his first episode include “God, you are killing me with that booty” and “The Jew thing I just do for the homeboys”) and see a backstory as creative and rich as this even needs to dedicate half of its show towards a cartel power play storyline involving Gus and Mike. But the increasing overlap between these two halves of the show showcases how complementary the trajectories of *Breaking Bad* and *Better Call Saul* are. In many ways, these shows are foils for each other.

The character transformation of Walter White is explosive and runs its course as a wish-fulfilling antihero story; Walt would have broken bad at some point since all the needed ingredients are present, but we do not know how exactly the story ends, leading to edge-of-your seat drama. *Better Call Saul*’s core character transformation feels more fluid. Because of his desire for love and legitimacy, Jimmy’s character transformation is so dependent on his relationships and thereby richer in possible outcomes on paper. However, the ending of *Better Call Saul* is ultimately not ambiguous – we know exactly who Jimmy becomes. This is the defining dichotomy between the shows. The plot of *Br*eaking Bad* comparatively skews towards addressing the what and what’s next, while *Better Call Saul* focuses on addressing the how. This is the defining dichotomy between the shows. Given these holistic differences, it would be ironic if *Better Call Saul* finally takes home an Emmy for its most *Breaking Bad*-like season.

So, which show is better? This question requires a discussion that merits a whole separate post. Ultimately, this inevitable debate should be treated as a testament to the caliber of the writers room that they can tell both of these complementary stories at such a high level. When the complete box set of *Better Call Saul* becomes available, it should be sold as a dual purchase with the complete box set of *Breaking Bad*. Which series and story you connect with more has turned out to be a profoundly personal question. 

Emmy-voters should also take note of the level of emotional foresight it takes to realize that on the home stretch of the road towards becoming Saul Goodman, Jimmy should be in the passenger’s seat. It almost did not turn out that way. At the end of Season 1, reeling from Chuck’s betrayal and his fellow conman and friend Marco’s death, Jimmy drives away from the courthouse and the best job offer he’s ever gotten up to that point while singing the riff to “Smoke on the Water”, and vows not to let “the right thing” stop him ever again. The ending is abrupt. It felt like the show ran out of episodes, but still needed a powerful and suggestive ending to their first season. Their chosen ending betrays a leftover influence from *Breaking Bad*: A hurt Jimmy **chooses** to embrace his dark side, much like Walt would. But is that really how the lovable Jimmy McGill would break bad?

So, who should be driving instead of Jimmy? Between Seasons 1 and 2, the writers reevaluated, took stock of what they had in the Kim character, who up to that point had been relatively a blank canvas storywise, and retconned that Season 1 ending for Jimmy. Building on how Jimmy latches onto the idea of sharing an office with Kim from Season 1, Jimmy takes the job for Kim, going against the inner voice telling him to leave the law behind. He also causally introducing her to the world of “Slippin’” a la Ken Wins. It’s tear-wrenchingly tragic to think about how Jimmy and Kim’s doomed love story began with twin acts of affection: Kim trying to help Jimmy get a job he had always wanted, and Jimmy accepting it to get closer to Kim. The title of that fateful episode, “Switch”, refers to a switch Jimmy rebelliously flips in the final scene in his new law office. I would choose to interpret it as a reference to the creative lightbulb the writers turned on as they alighted on this devastating multi-season arc for Kim and Jimmy, and completely changed gears[^3]. 

The show’s creators have repeatedly promised that we will [“see the story of *Breaking Bad* in a different light” after this season](https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/movies/movie-news/bob-odenkirk-on-nobody-and-what-to-expect-from-better-call-saul-season-6-4156861/), and [cast members have hinted at “Rashomon”-style re-explorations of *Breaking Bad* plotlines](https://ew.com/tv/better-call-saul-rhea-seehorn-final-season-kim-preview/). I do not think the shift in perspective is limited to plotlines, as I have already begun to see Walt’s transformation differently given Kim’s own fall. 

Walt’s status as the “hero” and protagonist of *Breaking Bad* obscures how destructive his descent was for not just for his enemies and competitors, but those closest to him. Even when it is explored through the eyes of the long-suffering Skyler, the audience can only see her as a party-pooper and annoyance ([or even worse](https://www.cbr.com/breaking-bad-skyler-white-hate/)). On *Better Call Saul*, Walt’s “breaking bad” storyline is being replicated in some ways by Kim Wexler, who is now in the driver’s seat with Jimmy strapped in beside her. It’s no coincidence that this season feels even more like *Breaking Bad*, and Kim seems to be its engine. Like Walter, this lifestyle is an obsession, an addiction, a passion for Kim, and Jimmy is primed to become the collateral damage that we fully comprehend this time around [^4].

As Season 6 begins, we can see now that last leg of Jimmy’s descent towards Saul Goodman will be different than Walt’s. It will not be wholly his choice and will require the near-total suppression of the best parts of Jimmy’s nature. Unlike Walt and Kim, no final liberations are needed for Jimmy to fully break bad, just the resulting trauma.


[^1]: For those familiar with the MTBI system, Wall-E and Eve and Jimmy and Kim both have “gender-flipped” version of the much-discussed extroverted-feeling and introverted-thinking relationship type.

[^2]: It is interesting to compare the Walter-Jesse co-dependency/father-son-like relationship with Jimmy and Kim’s connection. Jesse and Jimmy both introduce their respective partners in crime to the wider criminal world (see *Better Call Saul* Episode 505, “Dedicado A Max”). It’s also interesting that the writers gravitated back towards this archetype for *Better Call Saul*. This is not to say they are the same or the writers are being unoriginal – not by a long shot- but it is interesting to note how compelling aspects of this relationship seem to be for “Breaking Bad” stories.

[^3]: I’m certain that this has been the endgame for a while now. Season 2 not only contains the first movie reference to His Girl Friday (the other being in episode 509, Bad Choice Road), but also a movie reference to Ice Station Zebra (a movie Kim picks in episode 203, “Amarillo”). “Ice Station Zebra” is both the name of the holding company Saul Goodman uses for tax evasion in Breaking Bad, and the name of the fake start-up tech company from the Kim and Jimmy scam featured in episode 206, “Bali Ha’i”.

[^4]: Remember how terribly everything turned out for Jesse by the end of Breaking Bad? I’m not surprised Vince Gilligan felt compelled to make El Camino as *Better Call Saul* progressed. After seeing Jesse start his new life, I’d like to believe that this means Jimmy’s capacity for some sort of redemption is greater than Walter’s.
